---
title: Recommendations on Presenting of Statistical Results in Medical Literature
year: 2013
authors:
- James McCormack
- Ben Vandermeer
- G Michael Allan
tags:
- Mathematics
- Statistics
- Science Audit
source: mccormack2013
page: 5
sourceTitle: How Confidence Intervals Become Confusion Intervals
hasNotes: false
---

> We encourage authors to avoid statements like “X has no effect on mortality” as they are likely
>   to be both untrue and misleading.
> This is especially true as results get “close” to being statistically significant.
> Results should speak for themselves.
> For that to happen, readers (clinicians and science reporters) need to understand the language of statistics
>   and approach authors’ conclusions with a critical eye.
> We are not trying to say that the reader should not review the abstract
>   but when authors’ conclusions differ from others, readers must examine and compare the actual results.
> In fact, all but one of the meta-analyses provided point estimates and CIs in the abstracts.
> This facilitates quick comparisons to other studies reported to be “completely different,”
>   and to determine if the CIs demonstrate clinically important differences.
> The problem lies in the authors’ conclusions, which often have little to do with their results
>   but rather what they want the results to show.
> We encourage journal editors to challenge authors’ conclusions,
>   particularly when they argue they have found something unique or different than other researchers
>   but the difference is based solely on tiny variations in CIs or p-value (statistically significant or not).
>
> We are not suggesting the elimination of statistical testing or statistical significance,
>   but rather that all people (authors, publishers, regulators etc.)
>   who write about medical interventions use common sense and good judgment when presenting results
>   that differ from others and not be so beholden to the “magical” statistical significance level of 0.05.
> We urge them to consider the degree to which the results of the “differing” study overlap with their own,
>   the true difference in the point estimates and range of possible effects,
>   where the preponderance of the effect lies and how clinicians might apply the evidence.
>
> It appears that readers of the papers discussed here would be better served by reviewing the actual results
>   than reading the authors’ conclusions.
> To do that, clinicians need to be able to interpret the meaning of CIs and statistical significance.
