---
title: List of Boring Activities
year: 2018
authors:
- Chris Bailey
source: bailey-hyperfocus
page: 133
sourceTitle: "Hyperfocus: How to Be More Productive in a World of Distraction"
hasNotes: false
---

> During a monthlong experiment I intentionally made myself bored for an hour a day. In that period I shut off all distractions and spent my time and attention on an excruciatingly boring task, based on the thirty weirdest ideas suggested by my website readers:
>
> 1. Reading the iTunes terms and conditions
> 2. Staringattheceiling
> 3. Watching C-SPAN 3
> 4. Waiting on hold with Air Canada’s baggage claim department
> 5. Watching C-SPAN 2
> 6. Watching my turtle, Edward, swim back and forth in her tank
> 7. Staringataslowlyrotatingfanblade
> 8. Painting a tiny canvas with one color
> 9. Watchingpaintdry
> 10. Looking out my office window
> 11. Removing and counting the seeds on a strawberry with a pair of tweezers 12.Watching grass grow
> 13. Staring out a train window
> 14. Watching an online chess tournament
> 15. Watching one cloud in the sky
> 16. Waiting at the hospital
> 17. Watching a dripping faucet
> 18. Ironing every piece of clothing I own
> 19. Counting the 0s in the first 10,000 digits of pi
> 20. Watching my girlfriend read
> 21. Making dots on a sheet of paper
> 22. Eating alone in a restaurant, without a book or phone
> 23. Reading Wikipedia articles about rope
> 24. Watching a clock
> 25. Watching every file transfer from my computer to an external hard drive (and back)
> 26. Peeling exactly five potatoes
> 27. Watching a pot boil
> 28. Attending a church service in Latin
> 29. Watching C-SPAN
> 30. Moving small rocks from one place to another, repeatedly
