---
title: "Critique of McClintock's Study of Human Menstrual Cycles"
year: 2015
authors:
- Alex Reinhart
source: reinhart-statistics-done-wrong
page: 36
sourceTitle: "Statistics Done Wrong: The Woefully Complete Guide"
hasNotes: false
---

> McClintock’s study of human menstrual cycles went something like this:
> 1. Find groups of women who live together in close contactfor instance, college students in dormitories.
> 2. Every month or so, ask each woman when her last menstrual period began
>   and to list the other women with whom she spent the most time.
> 3. Use these lists to split the women into groups that tend to spend time together.
> 4. For each group of women, see how far the average woman’s period start date deviates from the average.
>
> Small deviations would mean the women’s cycles were aligned, all starting at around the same time.
> Then the researchers tested whether the deviations decreased over time,
>   which would indicate that the women were synchronizing.
> To do this, they checked the mean deviation at ﬁve different points throughout the study,
>   testing whether the deviation decreased more than could be expected by chance.
>
> Unfortunately, the statistical test they used assumed that if there was no synchronization,
>   the deviations would randomly increase and decrease from one period to another.
> But imagine two women in the study who start with aligned cycles.
> One has an average gap of 28 days between periods and the other a gap of roughly 30 days.
> Their cycles will diverge consistently over the course of the study, starting two days apart, then four days,
>   and so on, with only a bit of random variation because periods are not perfectly timed.
> Similarly, two women can start the study not aligned but gradually align.
>
> For comparison, if you’ve ever been stuck in traffic,
>   you’ve probably seen how two turn signals blinking at different rates will gradually synchronize
>   and then go out of phase again.
> If you’re stuck at the intersection long enough, you’ll see this happen multiple times.
> But to the best of my knowledge, there are no turn signal pheromones.
>
> So we would actually expect two unaligned menstrual cycles to fall into alignment, at least temporarily.
> The researchers failed to account for this effect in their statistical tests.
>
> They also made an error calculating synchronization at the beginning of the study:
>   if one woman’s period started four days before the study began and another’s started four days after,
>   the difference is only eight days.
> But periods before the beginning of the study were not counted,
>   so the recorded difference was between the fourth day and the ﬁrst woman’s next period,
>   as much as three weeks later.
>
> These two errors combined meant that the scientists were able to obtain statistically significant results even
>   when there was no synchronization effect outside what would occur without pheromones.
