---
title: The Influence of Journal Prestige on the Inflation of Effect Sizes in Small Trials
year: 2011
authors:
- Konstantinos CM Siontis
- Evangelos Evangelou
- John PA Ioannidis
tags:
- Mathematics
- Statistics
- Impact Factor
- Science Audit
- Effect Size
source: siontis2011
sourceTitle: Magnitude of Effects in Clinical Trials Published in high-impact General Medical Journals
hasNotes: false
---

> We found that small trials published in NEJM, JAMA and Lancet were more likely to display more favourable results
>   for experimental interventions compared with trials in other publication venues.
> Inflated effect sizes were seen primarily for early small trials in these prominent journals.
> Therefore, the results of small trials with spectacular early promises for large treatment effects should be seen
>   with great caution.
> Conversely, for large trials, effect estimates are likely to be more reliable.
> Small-study effects have been previously documented in the randomized trials literature.
> However, the results of our study provide further insight suggesting the possibility of a specific interaction
>   with further exaggerated effects when the limited evidence from
>   small trials appears in the most prestigious journals.
> Also, the inflation of effects in early randomized trials on particular interventions appears to be
>   quite specific to these most prestigious journals.
> Some modest heterogeneity was seen in the two tertiles with higher events,
>   but heterogeneity is difficult to determine in the tertile with lower events,
>   because of the wide uncertainty in the ROR for single topics, when there is limited evidence.
