---
title: Easy to Publish
year: 2011
authors:
- Joseph P Simmons
- Leif D Nelson
- Uri Simonsohn
tags:
- Mathematics
- Statistics
- Science Audit
- Psychology
source: simmons2011
page: 1359
sourceTitle: "False-Positive Psychology: Undisclosed Flexibility in Data Collection and Analysis Allows Presenting Anything as Significant"
hasNotes: true
---

> Our job as scientists is to discover truths about the world.
> We generate hypotheses, collect data, and examine whether or not the data are consistent with those hypotheses.
> **Although we aspire to always be accurate, errors are inevitable.**
> Perhaps the most costly error is a false positive, the incorrect rejection of a null hypothesis.
> First, once they appear in the literature, false positives are particularly persistent.
> Because null results have many possible causes, failures to replicate previous findings are never conclusive.
> Furthermore, because it is uncommon for prestigious journals to publish null findings
>   or exact replications, researchers have little incentive to even attempt them.
> Second, false positives waste resources:
>   They inspire investment in fruitless research programs and can lead to ineffective policy changes.
> Finally, a field known for publishing false positives risks losing its credibility.
> In this article, we show that despite the nominal endorsement of a maximum false-positive rate of 5%
>   (i.e., p ≤ .05), current standards for disclosing details of data collection
>   and analyses make false positives vastly more likely.
> In fact, **it is unacceptably easy to publish “statistically significant” evidence consistent with any hypothesis.**

(Emphasis is mine.)
