---
title: Scientific Method
year: 1993
authors:
- Steven N Goodman
tags:
- Mathematics
- Statistics
- p-value
- NHST
- Neyman-Pearson vs. Fisher
source: goodman1993
sourceTitle: "P values, Hypothesis tests, and likelihood: Implications for Epidemiology of a Neglected Historical Debate"
hasNotes: false
---

> The originators of the statistical frameworks that underlie modern epidemiologic studies recognized
>   that their methods could not be interpreted properly without an understanding of their philosophical underpinnings.
> Neyman held that inductive reasoning was an illusion
>   and that the only meaningful parameters of importance in an experiment
>   were constraints on the number of statistical "errors" we would make, defined before an experiment.
> Fisher rejected mechanistic approaches to inference,
>   believing in a more flexible, inductive approach to science.
> One of Fisher's developments, mathematical likelihood, fit into such an approach.
> The p value, which Fisher wanted used in a similar manner,
>   invited misinterpretation because it occupied a peculiar middle ground.
> Because of its resemblance to the pretrial a error, it was absorbed into the hypothesis test framework.
> This created two illusions: that an "error rate" could be measured after an experiment
>   and that this posttrial "error rate" could be regarded as a measure of inductive evidence.
> Even though Fisher, Neyman, and many others have recognized these as fallacies,
>   their perpetuation has been encouraged by the manner in which we use the p value today.
> One consequence is that we overestimate the evidence for associations,
>   particularly with p values in the range of 0.001-0.05, creating misleading impressions of their plausibility.
> Another result is that we minimize the importance of judgment in inference,
>   because its role is unclear when postexperiment evidential strength is thought
>   to be measurable with preexperiment "error-rates."
> Many experienced epidemiologists have tried to correct these problems
>   by offering guidelines about how p values should be used.
> We may be more effective if, in the spirts of Fisher and Neyman, we instead focus on clarifying what p values mean,
>   and on what we mean by the "scientific method."
