---
title: Investigating the Probability of Rejecting Null Hypotheses in Abnormal-Social Research
year: 1962
authors:
- Jacob Cohen
tags:
- Mathematics
- Statistics
- Psychology
- Statistical power
- Underpowered research
source: cohen1962
sourceTitle: "The Statistical Power of abnormal-social Psychological research: A Review"
hasNotes: false
---

> The results indicate that the investigators contributing to Volume 61 of
>   the *Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology* had, on the average,
>   a relatively (or even absolutely) poor chance of rejecting their major null hypotheses,
>   unless the effect they sought was large.
> This surprising (and discouraging) finding needs some further consideration to be seen in full perspective.
>
> First, it may be noted that with few exceptions, the 70 studies *did* have significant results.
> This may then suggest that perhaps the definitions of size of effect were too severe,
>   or perhaps, accepting the definitions, one might seek to conclude that the investigators were operating
>   under circumstances wherein the effects were actually large,
>   hence their success.
> Perhaps, then, research in the abnormal-social area is not as "weak" as the above results suggest.
> But this argument rests on the implicit assumption that the research which is *published* is representative of
>   the research *undertaken* in this area.
> It seems obvious that investigators are less likely to submit for publication unsuccessful than successful research,
>   to say nothing of a similar editorial bias in accepting research for publication.
> Consider this paradigm: 100 investigations are undertaken in which, in fact,
>   there is actually a medium population effect.
> From the above findings, about SO get positive results and are likely to come to publication;
>   the other SO fail to reject their (assumed false) null hypotheses and are unlikely to come to publication.
> Thus, the general success of the articles in the volume under review does not successfully argue for
>   their antecedent probabilities of success being any higher than the results of the analysis suggest, or,
>   equivalently, that the criteria for size of effect used were overly stringent."
